===============================================================================
==============================   CRUISE TOOLS   ===============================
===============================================================================
                                A QGIS plugin
 Tool box for various GIS tasks for cruise planning, etc.
                              -------------------
        begin                : 2019-06-12
        copyright            : (C) 2019 by Simon Dreutter & Fynn Warnke
        email                : simon.dreutter@awi.de
                               fynn.warnke@yahoo.de
===============================================================================

Cruise Tools is a python plugin for QGIS (>3.8) that is supposed to fill a
niche for cruise planning purposes. There are a handful of steps that we go
through each time we extract coordinates for the bridge (DDM, not DD) or load a
bathymetry grid (set color scale, hillshade, etc.) or similar. This is annoying
and time consuming, hence, there needs to be a quicker way. This is what Cruise
Tools was created for. It's supposed to create one (or two or three) click
solutions to substitute 10 (or twenty or thirty) clicks.
The toolbox is clearly still a work in progress, however, it’s functional to
some extend and should be used along the way of development. Here is how:


===============================   INSTALATION   ===============================

At some point, Cruise Tools will be available via the QGIS plugin utility.
Until then, it needs to be installed manually. To do so, close QGIS and copy
the cruisetools folder to your QGIS plugin directory. You can find this here:

Windows:
    C:\Users\<USER>\AppData\Roaming\QGIS\QGIS3\profiles\default\python\plugins\
Mac:
    ~/Library/Application\ Support/QGIS/QGIS3/profiles/default/python/plugins
Linux:
    ~/.local/share/QGIS/QGIS3/profiles/default/python/plugins

Open QGIS and go to Plugins > Manage and Install Plugins and activate Cruise
Tools (tick it). If the Cruise Tools toolbar is not visible, right click on an
open area on the toolbar and check Cruise Tools there as well.


==================================   USE IT  ==================================

At the time of writing, Cruise Tools comes with five different tools:

Write Point Coordinates
You just created your point feature layer with all your selected stations but
now you need the coordinates, not in decimal degrees but also in degrees
decimal minutes. Simply select the point feature layer and click the button and
Cruise Tools will fill the layer’s attribute table with all the coordinates you
need.

Write Line Lengths
You just planned your survey lines with a line feature layer and now you need
to figure out how long those are in nautical miles to get a time estimate for
the survey. Yet, using a measurement tool for that is tedious. Simply select
the point feature layer and click the button and Cruise Tools will fill the
layer’s attribute table with all the distance measurements you need.

Load Bathymetry Grid
You want to load a bathymetry (or topography) grid with hillshade and a nice
color scale. To do this manually takes about 1000 clicks (depending on how
crazy your viewing settings are). Cruise Tools has layer style files at hand
to color your bathymetry with a nice Haxby color scale and overlay it with a
hillshade that’s not just half transparently chucked on there like Ar*GIS users
tend to do. Simply click the button, select the grid file you want to load and
Cruise Tools will load the file, apply the style and move both color grid and
hillshade in a handy sub group.

Create Contours
You just used the Load Bathymetry Grid function to show your beautiful seafloor
topography. But now you want contour lines to make it a bit more readable.
Creating contours in QGIS is usually a quicky, however, that’s where the work
begins. You might want to have smoothed contours, you might want to filter the
little short bits out, and you might want to add some contour labels that are
pointing in the cartographically correct direction (uphill). Simply select the
bathymetry raster layer and click the button, select your interval and Cruise
Tools will create the smoothed contours and apply the style you might have been
looking for.

Swap Vectors
This is a helper tool for contour lines since bathymetry/topography grids
sometimes come positive up and sometimes positive down. Depending on this the
contour line vectors might have the wrong direction and need to be swapped in
order to set the labels right. Simply select the contour layer and click the
button and Cruise Tools will flip those vector directions around like it’s
nothing.

==================================   ISSUES  ==================================

If you have any issues with the plugin - or even better, suggestions for
improvement – feel free to contact us and we’ll see what we can do!


Enjoy!
